Please sit down.
Thank you.
Morning.
Morning, everyone.
Well, good morning, Your Honor, and
both of you. It'd be great. We've got 45 minutes with you,
so you've probably done this before, but very keen to maybe get some
introductory comments and then open it up for questions as much as possible.
Well, I haven't done it before, is the answer.
Oh, you haven't?
And-
Well, welcome
... I've done similar things before.
I'm sure you have stood in a similar situation before.
And I want to start by thanking you all for the invitation.
It's a great pleasure to be here. We've been looking forward to it for some
time. Can I just introduce Peter Clinton, who's our
corporate manager at the IPCA, who's joined me so that I
don't make a pig's ear of the financial side of things?
I'm told, or I understand, that I've got three minutes.
I hope-
No, no, you can take longer than that. We've got 45 with me.
Right.
It'd be good if you gave us...
I was going to say, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was going to say that I might just exceed that-
Yeah
... in my verbose way, so you'll forgive me.
There are really two parts to what I want to talk to the committee
about today. One is, the major thing is how we've
been tracking over recent times, and so on and so forth.
The second is I want to touch briefly on
our expectations about the intended
establishment of the Office of Inspector General of Police.
But that'll be fairly short because my knowledge about that at the
moment is relatively limited.
So starting with our recent work,
I think the last time that the authority was before this committee was
in February 2023.
A great deal has changed since then, apart from the change of
chair. There's also been a change in the
composition of our board,
and in our organization's structure, and indeed in
our complement, which has shrunk for reasons I'll come
to. The only thing,
in fact, that has remained
constant since that time is our baseline
funding,
which has remained static since 2022-'23
at, you're probably already aware,
$6.7 million or thereabouts.
And about 90% of that is expended
in personnel and rent. A whisker over
90%, I think.
And yet, since that financial
year, there has been a material increase,
which I want the committee to understand, in terms of both
the quantity and quality and complexity of the
complaints that we receive. We're primarily a complaints body, as you'll
realize.
So 2022-'23, we had an
8% increase, thereabouts. These are rough figures.
In 2023-'24, we had a 6% increase in
complaints. This is gross numbers, of course.
9% in 2024-'25, and
I confidently anticipate something north of
5% this year, which if I add those up, I come to a
total of a 28% increase, and that's
ignoring the compounding factor, which I'm afraid is
beyond my arithmetical capacity to
calculate. But it's about
something well north of a quarter of a...
a complaint.
An increase of a bit over a quarter.
So in one sense,
that's been a good thing for the authority.
It's forced us, really over my period of time with it,
to
focus our attention on efficiency and ensuring that the funding
that we do have is utilized to best advantage
for the members of the public who we are there to serve.
So,
I want to just take a moment to talk about the responses that we've put in
place to cope with
those things.
So first and foremost,
we've made sure over that period of time, and this has not
been especially easy, to bring ourselves to a point
where
last year we operated
within it. Yes, last year we operated
within our budget.
That's not always been the case for the authority.
There were some
difficulties associated with the parliamentary protest and other things.
But in any event,
there was expenditure beyond
the budget for some time, which is
dangerous of course, although we have kept a responsible level
of reserves.
But last year we operated within our budget.
This year, I'm afraid we will be
running a small deficit budget, and if we project out with
fairly conservative cost increases over a period of time,
which may of course become irrelevant now,
that gets pretty ugly within two or three years.
So,
the second thing is we've focused
carefully on our management group because we wanted to
ensure that theFunding that we do have is
primarily directed at doing our core role rather than
anything else. For example, when our general manager
retired
18 months, is it 18 months somewhere there?
Mm, little over.
Yeah. Ago, we didn't replace him,
which I have to say,
resulted in substantially increased expectations,
primarily for Peter as the corporate manager, but also for
me as the chair and the operation managers.
Peter's borne the brunt of that, though.
And we also reduced our numbers.
We had some folk there who had been
there for a while and,
in any event, we ended up with a tighter management group.
So the third thing that we did
was a modest reorganization to the way in which we operated,
so that our three operational managers in particular,
were able to focus on
the three areas of activity, which is the resolution section dealing with
the bulk of complaints. The section
which focuses on supervision of police
inquiries and the section which focuses on independent
investigations. So
that was
not as clear as it was. We focused on that and it's worked very well.
And,
the fourth thing, and this has been very important for us, we have
developed strategies to deal with what you may think
I call unkindly, meritless complaints.
You can imagine that we get a number of complaints which
obviously from day one are not going anywhere.
Let me just give the committee an example so that you know the sort of thing I'm
talking about.
Someone gets caught or pulled over for doing
135K on Desert Road and
he or she complains that they were given a ticket when it was a very clear
day and there was no other traffic around and that the
policeman was a little rude to her about her driving or his driving or
whatever. And really what they want is the ticket to be...
They think that we have some power to dispense with the ticket.
We don't. And we need to tell them that quickly before we spend time.
In the past, we have
carried out sort of minor investigations and written long involved letters.
One of the things I've done is implement what we
call a summary process, which you probably
can see immediately, especially those of you who have a legal background,
reflects what happens in the high court.
And those things are dealt with pretty swiftly by a small group of people who are
discerning, and we try to be very careful to ensure that nothing slips
through the net that ought to be looked at more carefully.
So that's enabled us to deal with some things efficiently, I think.
And then finally, the fifth thing we've done is
try and be more discerning about
what we call the thematic work that we do.
Let me give you an example of that as well.
The Free Speech Union,
which is vocal and an important party in
this sort of area,
advanced three
specific complaints about the way police dealt recently with
some cases involving mental health issues.
And invited us not only to look at the three particular
complaints, but also to do a thematic review of the police's
policy in this area. In the past, we might have done that.
We just don't have the resources to do it.
So we've gone back and
received some criticism for this.
We've said, "Of course, we will look at the complaints.
They look serious and important, but we just can't engage in
a long involved thematic review." Now,
can I just say, this is a matter of concern to me,
because I think
that one of the most effective
areas that the IPCA--
or one of the most effective things it's done over the years is
to
engage in that thematic work. So it's a matter of
disappointment to me that I
can't allow the staff to
do more of that sort of work. But there we go.
That's just basically a resource issue.
I'm sure everyone understands.
So, I want to say, having
described the things that we've done, I want to say that in my judgment,
we have gone just about as far as we possibly
can down these roads of efficiency.
And any further down that path would present a serious risk
of not
being able to discharge our statutory responsibilities.
We would be at risk of turning away complaints which really do deserve
a careful
examination.
And frankly,
I have to say that without-
... even a modest increase in our
budget,
and I know that the committee's not necessarily looking at this, but I can't
contain myself. I feel I've got to say this.
Without at least a modest increase in our
budget from the 1st of July, I think we are
already at that cusp, at that risk area.
We've got a bid in, so we'll see what happens, but I just wanted the committee to
know, get a real flavor for where we are with some of
these things.Acknowledging, of course, the constraints that the
government and the public purse is under.
Yeah.
So let me give you some highlights and get on to cheerier topic and give you
some highlights about the last three or so years.
We have managed to deal with-- Am I running out of time?
No, just a couple more. Five more minutes. Seven.
Easily.
Okay.
We've dealt with all of our complaints.
We've completed some very large and complex investigations.
We've dealt with the individual complaints as opposed to the
general complaint arising out of parliamentary protest.
We've had the Allen Hall wrongful conviction
investigation, which was the subject of prosecution in the house.
So I don't want to say any more about that.
We've had the Farzana Yaqoob case,
which was really important. A
young Muslim woman who was murdered
by someone
who was stalking her and our report, I think, helped to
highlight some of the inadequacies in the way our
legislation reads and the way it's enforced.
So that was important. You might have heard about this one, the
McSkimming investigation of last year.
And we're currently engaged in a long and difficult
investigation involving the Fuller Sands wrongful convictions
of the
murder several years ago.
So we've done a lot of very heavy lifting, I think,
in that period of time.
By no means, not all by me, in fact, far from it.
We've got a
group of fantastic people. So,
despite what I said about
thematic reviews, we've also managed to fit in a
long and difficult thematic review involving policing protests
and also, the CEPOL,
I forget what the acronym stands for, but the interviewing technique, the
sort of friendly
sitting in a couch with people and
interviewing technique.
And during that time we've maintained, I think, a stable and
dedicated workforce, which I'm very proud of.
And I like to think that we've
had a genuine impact on the police and how they operate, and
through that, a positive impact on the way the
New Zealand public are served by the police.
By no means perfect, but I think we've had a positive impact.
And we can talk about,
if you wish, the measures that we use to
try and analyze that, but I'd just prefer, I'm likely to end up referring back to
the Yaqoob and McSkimming cases. Anyway, that's all I
wanted to say about
our recent work. Can I just spend less than a minute on the
future?
Yes.
Assuming it looks likely that the proposal to
create an office and role of Inspector General of Police
proceeds,
the authority, in its current form at least, doesn't have
an independent future.
The new entity will have
an own motion power, which,
frankly, my predecessor and I have been pressing for for years.
And
a much wider jurisdiction
comparable to the jurisdiction of the officers dealing
with the spy and defense organizations.
So our core complaints-based function,
which neither of those organizations have, will remain.
But as I understand it at the moment,
none of that is going to be
in place until towards the end of
next year,
which means my retirement is postponed.
But that's as may be.
To date, the senior management team at the IPC have been working
very closely with the ministry and with police to try and help
identify the
difficulties associated with that, and that's proceeding apace.
But I'm unable to say what the new organization might look like.
All I've done in that regard is to give my staff assurance
that I'll hang around and help them through that process until
it winds its way to a conclusion, as these things do, in the
fullness of time, as they say. So I'm sorry, I'll probably take a lot more-
Your golf handicap will take a battering, I think.
Well, my golf handicap is zero, but my hunting
handicap's not too bad.
All right. Okay. Hey, now I've got a whole lot of people lining up for questions.
So the first one's Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Oh, thank you. Well, thank you both for being here.
And thanks for outlining
basically the over 25% increase in complaints you're receiving
and some of the issues. That's great.
Have you been able to pick up any kind of themes through that increase in
complaints? Is there anything that kind of,
yeah, any commonality? I'm just curious. Yeah.
You mean of the additional ones?
Well, of the additional or you might be just getting more complaints in a
particular area. Anything that springs to mind with that. Yeah.
It fluctuates. Let me try. I think by and
large, if you stood back and looked at the stats, and I'm going to
use your question as an opportunity to talk about one other tiny thing in a moment,
but
because it's a good question.
If you stood back and look at it, you would probably not see much of
a different pattern.
Right.
It's probably just more-
Volume
... generally over the scope of things.
But there are changes from time to time.
For example, we had a terrible run a couple of years
ago of dog bites.Police seem to be using
dogs in a fairly
vigorous way,
and a lot of time and effort was put in. We dealt with a lot of complaints.
That seems to have fallen off. So there's a change.
I hope, I'd like to think because of the work that the IPCA put
in with police, because police are extraordinarily cooperative
in all of these areas.
And I dare say there would be some opportunity to look at
patterns, but here's my dig. We haven't got the
resources to engage either
internally by employment or externally
by data analytics.
Right.
We've been trying to do that for about five years, because
that is an avenue to identify when
influence things most effectively.
But we just can't afford it.
Right. Okay, thanks. I've got Ms. Camellia Bellet.
Yeah. Thanks very much. It was really interesting to hear about the work that you
do. I just had some questions around the responses
to written questions that you put forward.
Yes.
And so I'll just take-
Should I-
... kind of in two different areas.
Should I get out my version of the-
Yeah
... written? Okay.
You could. The first one was just in...
You may not need to read it exactly, but in the answer to question 54, you
talked about two different protected disclosures that you had received as
an organization. The second one is clearly in relation to police
conduct. The first one I just wanted to know, and obviously there may be some
restrictions or sensitivities about what you can
tell us about in a public hearing. But with that in mind, I just
wanted to ask whether the
first matter was something relating to a complaint that you'd received
about police conduct, and if there was anything else you could
tell us about that
matter. And the second area that I was interested in was
question seven, where you talk about the fact that over the last five
years, the authority hasn't had a gender pay gap.
That's quite an unusual answer for us to see
in responses to questions. And I just wanted to ask how you went
about calculating
that. I can see from the
outline of senior staff that there is a-- It
might be that they are
different people despite their gender are paid the same amount of money, but I just
wanted to know how you calculated that.
Okay.
It's a bit unusual for us to see that.
Yeah. It's strange you should ask that, because when I read the first
draft of these responses-
Yeah
... I wondered about that very question, and I'll come to it.
Let me deal with this first. I don't
have a specific recollection of these
protected disclosures, but bullying corruption, I believe I
know
what
that involves. And it is a
section, I don't think there's anything
troubling about me saying it, because it's almost obvious anyway.
It's a section within police where there was a bit of
factionalization and
complaints probably on both sides about bullying by
senior staff. One of the interesting sort
of demarcation points for us is we don't see ourselves as the
police human rights, sorry, not human rights,
human resources department.
And we often when something of that sort comes in say, "Well, that's
something that you've got to sort out." But when there is
an obvious
allegation of
particularly bad behavior or inappropriate behavior on behalf of
an identified officer or identified officers, we will look at it, and that would've
been
that event. Where in the country that was, I'm sorry, I don't know.
As-- You don't know?
No, sorry.
As to the first question,
I think
our answer, in fact, I'm certain that our answer is
formulated on what you may well think is an
old-fashioned view of the gender
pay gap, which is
it doesn't matter who's in the role, we are paid the same
amount, whether it's male or female.
And I know that there's a much more sophisticated way of looking at
that-
Mm-hmm
... or a very different way of looking at that.
And I don't think we have gone through a complex
assessment of
that nature. So I think that's a simplistic answer to the question.
We simply have a role. It's paid X dollars.
It doesn't matter
whether it's male or female.
And that may not be the most adequate sort
of view or approach to it in other people's minds, but
I'm afraid that that's what we've done. Is that fair?
That's fair. And, sorry, I might just add that we are right now going through an
external review of our remuneration,
and that will result in a refresh, perhaps, of our
remuneration bands, obviously market
rates. And also we'll move from there to a remuneration
policy as well. So an updated policy.
So that's an external party that's providing support for that.
It's been three years since we've done that exercise, so we think that
that's timely that we do it now. So we will actually have an
updated, modern, comprehensive strategy and
policy at that point.
Right.
Yeah, no, I appreciate the answer, and I think that's what I had garnered by
reading your answer.
What we usually are looking for when we ask, and these are
questions that get asked to every agency, is a
kind of calculation regardless of the band.
So if that was work that was undertaken during your remuneration review, I'm sure
the committee would be interested to see if there was any updated statistics.
We can certainly provide that.
All right, cool. Now in terms of Paul
Thank you. Mōrena.
So
I've got a couple questions, so would appreciate your brevity in answer, if that's
okay. Sorry, not trying to be rude, it's just we don't have a lot of time left.
The
government introduced the Policing Amendment Bill this week, which is
a
response to an IPCA report which found that the
collection of tens of thousands of images of
people
was unlawful, and it was also a report by the privacy
commissioner. They're now changing the law to make that lawful.
Once you've done
your report, do you follow what happens after that, or you leave your
report and that's that?
No.
So
are you concerned that that's setting a precedent whereby the IPCA finds the
police to be doing something unlawful, and then the government comes in and
legalizes those actions?
You're inviting me to have a political view about
that.
That's okay if you can't answer.
I don't.
That's all good.
Yep. That's fine.
So,
the
government have introduced a number of laws that
rely on the police making calls and judgments.
The ones that I'm thinking about are the gang
patch ban, and I want to understand the interaction between the police and the
courts and the IPCA because
people who have had their property seized, has been ordered to be returned
by the courts.
Mm-hmm.
And I'm wondering whether there's this disconnect between the
government and the judiciary and whether that is also leading
to further complaints or could be contributing to a higher volume
of complaints.
Sure.
Again, I'm not sure that's something I am in a position
to comment on.
You know how the system works as well as I do, which is
the government passes the legislation, the courts interpret and
apply it-
Mm
... as best they can. There may be tensions for all I know about
those things, but
not that
I'm particularly
to stay with.
That's fine. I'm just wondering if there's a connection between the attorney
general making a report before a bill is passed-
Mm-hmm
... that warns that there are things that might breach human rights, and then it is
enacted and then it is enforced.
Yep.
And then it is, could that contribute to a higher volume of
complaints, is what I'm saying?
No.
Potentially?
Yes.
Okay.
And then the other question I had is around
resourcing. So I know you said in your opening
remarks that you don't have a whole lot of details to talk about in terms of the
Inspector General of Police.
Mm.
But are the IPCA thinking about
whether your resources will be reduced in order to resource that new office,
or are you hoping that
yours will stay the same?
I can talk to that.
Yep.
My understanding of the position, and I'm very confident about this because I've
been closely connected with the
ministers involved and the
Justice Department and the police, all of whom have been enormously helpful.
What
will emerge, I am confident, is a new
organization,
which will be headed by the Inspector General
of Police,
and that will
incorporate the IPCA in its, essentially in its
current form, the complaints component, but it will have other things
attached to it.
Okay. So do you-
So I'm not concerned that there's going to be any-
Loss of your resources in order to resource that office.
No, because it'll be one in-
Yeah.
Our resource will be-
Subsumed. Is that the right-
Subsumed is a good word.
Mm. Okay, so you're not worried about there being too much crossing over and
stepping on toes?
No.
No, I can say with peace it's subsumed.
There's going to be one organization.
Okay, now let's go to the honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Kia ora, Judge. Look,
kind of a couple of themed questions.
And if I can
introduce it by saying I think your organization's about trust
in the wider justice network, but specifically in
policing. And so with that in mind, I'd be
interested in knowing a little bit more
about your summary disposal framework,
and
just how we can reassure people who make complaints, which
are summarily disposed of-
Mm-hmm
...
that it's a fair and rigorous process.
Yeah. I've got a good answer to that, and it is-
It's not a trick question.
No, I know. I know it's not. It's a very fair and
useful question, and I'm pleased you've raised it.
Just to let you know exactly how it works, we've got two specialist
people
who read the complaints,
and identify whether they can see
any merit in them. There are
some which you'll appreciate from sovereign citizens or whatever, which
are obviously,
don't need to go any further.
There are some which,
although they may have been filtered through that particular sieve, obviously
needed to because there's some obvious merit in them.
And then there's a group in the middle.
That group in the middle is probably
25%, a quarter. They are referred to our
resolutions manager, Cath Annan, or her team
leader, Sarah Rolfe, and they have another look at
it.And the reason I can be confident
that
people aren't sitting simmering because they haven't
been heard is they do get a response and an explanation,
and the return
percentage from those
is minuscule. It really is de minimis compared with the
next layer, which are the people that we look at in a reasonably short
form of investigation and give them a full response, which
is usually quite high because they'll come back and argue about the merits of it.
But the
summary folk
Just to clarify, the summary ones, are they all declined?
For a summary disposal, does there have to be a declined result?
Well, if it's not declined, it's passed on to the next stage
and it's not treated as summary anymore.
Okay. Yeah, I know that. Well, that answers that question.
Can I then go to my next part of that question, which is
around your category
B complaints-
Mm-hmm
... which is about 200, I think. And these are
ones which I think
raise the question of independence most acutely,
right? Because these are
legitimate complaints about the police
that the police then investigate-
Yes
... on your behalf and under-
... your supervision.
Yes.
So once again, I guess the question is ultimately the same.
How can someone with a category B complaint be
confident that the I bit of the
IPCA is real?
Mm-hmm.
Another perfectly fair question.
And I was
not intending to be at all facetious in response.
If I had my way, we'd be resourced to investigate them all independently, but we
just can't.
There's, I mean, at a rate of five and a half thousand complaints a year-
Mm
... we'd need to be at least four times the size we are to do that.
But what we assure
people, and I assure the committee, is that
we have a very vigorous
review process. The police themselves are very good at this.
No one connected with it is involved in
investigating. They usually almost always take it out of the district,
and then they report to us on the way through.
They are obliged to carry out whatever investigations we direct
them to carry out in the course of looking at the
complaint.
And we will do an independent
letter to the complainant saying, "Here's the level of
supervision we provided here. Here's why we were dissatisfied with this
component and told them to do a bit more.
Here's the views we have."
To go back to your first comment, though, because it wasn't facetious at all.
Ideally,
there's
still government resources going into it, it's just coming from a different
department, right? So ideally, you would have a team
of people. Why do you think would be better
to have the resources to investigate those-
Well-
... 200 yourself?
For the very reason that underlies your question in the first place, which is
that it would be absolutely
a guarantee of independence-
That's right
...
of a stronger sort than exists at the moment.
But
Are there incidents where, in these category of cases,
your independent review
shows that the investigation is either not up
to scratch or infected in some way with
a bias?
Certainly there are.
And
one of the things that we have been pressing very hard for, and I think
successfully, is that the new organization, when it emerges,
can
direct the police
to
investigate matters which they're not investigating at the moment and so on and so
forth.
And
when we disagree, we say so. And I mean, I'll
give you an example.
About two
years ago, a senior police officer who
it transpired was hitting his,
or had hit his kids with a belt.
The police investigated.
They decided that there was nothing
serious enough to warrant prosecution or anything else.
We disagreed, and I said so publicly.
So-
I think I said that I couldn't understand the conclusion they'd reached.
Back to those class B cases. If there's a defect in the
investigation,
are the police obliged to follow
your direction in terms of, say they didn't interview someone.
No.
And you say, "You should have interviewed this possible witness.
Go and do it."
No.
The police can turn around and say, "We'd rather not, then"?
No. Once an investigation starts, we can direct them to
carry out-
Certainly. Yeah
... pursue it in various ways.
A very interesting exchange. Right. I've got Rima Nakhaie.
Oh, yes. Thank you. Thank you, Your Honor.
I'd like to ask, if I may,
you mentioned that you wish you could conduct more thematic
research. If you were able to in an ideal world, what would be
maybe three themes that you'd-
Oh, dear
... get onto straight away?
Oh, thank you.
Well,
I think one of the things that we'd dearly like to do is
to delve-- I can only think of one.
Yeah.
Dealing with a very limited mind here, I'm afraid.
No.
But the one that immediately occurs to me is we had
actually somebody from
the United States from theLos Angeles Police Department,
or the Los Angeles equivalent of us, which happens to be part of the
police in Los Angeles,
who
spent three months with us last year and did some really
outstanding research
and set out how we could look at
discrimination and police bias and this, that, and the next thing, and a
whole lot of areas. We, for years, have wanted to get into that
area, and
we just can't. So that's my best example.
Okay. Can I ask another question, please, Mr. Chair?
With respect to the Inspector General of Police,
what planning's taken place by the authority
in response to this imminent
placement, and how would that look in practice?
Well, it's not
as imminent as it was.
It's been pushed back a bit, so I think October
2027 is the sort of kickoff date. Clearly, things will
have to be done before then.
Yes.
But it's not really for us to
be planning that. That will be largely politically
directed and through the Justice Department, and we will engage
and do what we need to do to put ourselves in a position where
whoever's appointed,
which won't be me, I have to say,
hit the ground running in October
next year.
Okay, so at this stage, it's more a case of when it
happens-
Yeah
... you'll respond accordingly.
I'm a child when it comes to
political matters. But
I don't think a Cabinet paper's even gone up yet.
Yep. Okay. Thank you.
All right. We've got Mr. Tom Rutherford.
Yeah. I want to talk about that case where a
police officer had a relationship with a gang member-
Mm
... and then subsequently was leaking information from the police
database to that associate. Can you talk about
your role in that case?
Sure.
And what was undertaken?
Yep. Can I
broaden it?
Yep.
It might be helpful if I broaden it a bit.
Police have a database called NIAS, which I think it stands for National
Information something or other.
And
for a long time we have been very concerned about the
discipline around searching NIAS.
Obviously the purpose is you see a car speeding, you look up the
registration. And
we discovered as a result of the odd complaint for
a period of time, that
certain police officers, this wasn't everybody, of
course, but certain police officers were habitually using it for sort of
personal reasons.
Mm-hmm.
Looking up their brother-in-law or something like that.
And
we went on a bit of a campaign and, after a period of time,
the police, who I keep emphasizing, enormously
cooperative in dealing with us, they're much stricter about that now.
So they monitor it much more carefully.
They
ensure that,
they can't look at everyone, but I guess they dip sample-
Yep
... and so forth. And they
try and
exercise a degree of discipline over that.
If you're a nurse and you look up the computer,
I know this from chairing the Medical Discipline Tribunal, a doctor or a nurse who
looks up the hospital computer for their own reasons, they lose their practicing
certificate.
Mm-hmm.
And the police are now taking this very seriously.
What about,
close to that, the situation we were made aware of last year where
30,000 breath alcohol tests-
Yes
... were falsified by police officers.
What would your role be in monitoring
or enforcement in that space?
Well,
this sort of gets back to Mr. Webb's
question about category Bs. We treated that as a category B
because the police took that enormously seriously.
They acknowledged from day one that this was completely unacceptable,
and they
created a little team to decide how to deal with it as best they could.
And
so we
monitored what they were doing, and we agreed with the
strategies that they were putting in place to examine what had happened
and discipline people where appropriate and so forth, and it's still going on.
What about the many thousand police officers we have across the country
who ultimately turn up day in, day out to serve their
communities to keep-
Mm-hmm
... people safe. For the most part, all of them do a fantastic
job. Would that be your assessment?
And there is-
It's my-
Just like in any organization, there is the occasional bad egg.
There's some in this place.
Good heavens. You astound me.
But-
Not on this committee, though.
No.
But for the most part, from your perspective and the work you've
overseen-
Yeah
... is that the assessment you would agree with?
Well, absolutely. Our police are
astonishing. They work long hours.
They
put themselves in danger every day. I couldn't do it.
And I am just full of admiration. But, as you say, like
every organization, there are people who
just don't behave appropriately.
Can I just ask an extension around the data?
We're hearing on the Arms Bill right now, a whole lot of submissions, a lot of
concerns about data breaches or possible
data breaches, obviously-
Yes
... information we knew about the Palmerston North situation.
Mm.
Does that come under your jurisdiction?
No. It would if there was a suggestion of impropriety, and in fact, we have
done quite a lot of work around theCurrent arms-
Registration
... uh, organization. And,
that's again, that's bullying and so forth in that area.
No, but with the registered data, the concerns around,
search your records, you're a hunter.
I don't know what type of hunter, but you may have a whole lot of, uh, rifles at
your home that has, uh, leaked, and therefore you could be a burglary,
um, obviously.
Yeah. Well,
from a personal point of view, that has concerned me when I had to
re-register my firearms.
Right.
And I have nothing like 100, I have to say, but, um-
But, does that come under your jurisdiction?
Well it would if there was impropriety-
Okay
... if there was a suggestion of a leak or something like that-
Cool
... and somebody had been-
Right
... contacting gang members or...
Right. We're going to do two questions, one from you, uh,
from Camilla, and then we're going to do one from Tempest.
Thank you. I had a question around, um,
decision decisions by police. Sometimes we get
correspondence-
Right
... um, around decisions that the police have to, whether they've
decided to prosecute or not. And obviously as legislators, that's not something
we can be-
Mm-hmm
... involved in at all.
Mm-hmm.
Like it would not be appropriate for us.
And it's the people that contact us are not satisfied with that-
Yes
... um, that response. Is that something that you...
I know that you've looked at, obviously looked at instances of where prosecutions
are taken and people have, um, complaints about that.
But when there's, say, a clear law that the police aren't
utilizing-
Mm-hmm
... is that something that you would, um, have capacity to look into?
Mr. Chairman, can I have another three quarters of an hour?
No.
Uh, you've touched on a very enormous
concern of mine. Let me try and
put this briefly.
In the England and Wales, the Crown
Prosecution Service make decisions about that.
In, uh, Scotland, the Procurator Fiscal Service makes decisions about
that. In Northern Ireland, they have their own Crown Prosecution Service.
In Eyre, they have their own prosecution service.
In every state of the United States, the district
attorneys, uh, have to sign off on that.
In every state in Australia, and on a federal basis, there are a,
a corresponding organizations that have to deal with that.
In every province in Canada. We are the standout exception.
The,
um,
uh, conflict or the potential conflict that the public is entitled
to be worried about is blindingly obvious.
I have been on a bit of a campaign and, um, you'll be
pleased to hear that I think I have persuaded...
Well, I've certainly persuaded the commissioner, uh, who agrees entirely.
Um, uh, and I think that when the new legislation
emerges, part of it will be an amendment in that area which brings
a degree of genuine independence, I hope,
to the prosecution of police officers.
Um, at least for criminal as opposed to summary offenses.
All right. We're now out of time. Do you really need a question or not?
Yep. It could be a yes or no.
Right.
Ah.
Um, just-
Go for it.
No, because I'm really passionate about, um,
stalking and women's experience of stalking.
Right.
Um, thank you for your work around what
happened to Farzana Yaqub. Did you feel that following the
investigation that, um, because we haven't seen the report because it wasn't
released publicly-
No
... but we did know what the recommendations were.
Did you feel like those were translated into the stalking law that eventuated
last year with unanimous support or more-
Y- yes, yes, we did.
Did you feel-
We did.
Yeah. Were you able to inform the development of that legislation?
Uh, we had a mild hand in it, but we didn't have to do very
much because-
Cool
... um, I think it was cross-party support for it.
Yeah.
You know, for toughening up-
All right. He, I want to thank you, uh, for your service.
Keep going until 27.
Man.
Keep the message-
There's gotta, you've gotta be more, there's a bit of rhyme there somewhere, isn't
there?
Thank you for coming today out.
Right.
It's been a fascinating-
Appreciate it
... conversation.
Thank you.
Very good.
It was a great-
Well, we've enjoyed it too, so.
Right. Um,
so you...
Right. Miss?
Feel I should bow.
No.
Don't do that, no.